gh-115999: Note Python 3.14 free-threaded changes in What's New (#131285)
python/cpython: Doc/whatsnew/3.14.rst

* :ref:`PEP 761: Discontinuation of PGP signatures <whatsnew314-pep761>`
* :ref:`A new type of interpreter  <whatsnew314-tail-call>`
* :ref:`PEP 765: Disallow return/break/continue that exit a finally block <whatsnew314-pep765>`

> * :ref:`Free-threaded CPython <whatsnew314-free-threaded-cpython>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :ref:`Free-threaded mode improvements <whatsnew314-free-threaded-cpython>`
```

(Contributed by Ken Jin in :gh:`128563`, with ideas on how to implement this
in CPython by Mark Shannon, Garrett Gu, Haoran Xu, and Josh Haberman.)

.. _whatsnew314-free-threaded-cpython:

Free-threaded CPython
---------------------

Free-threaded CPython now supports :pep:`659` which is known

> as the specializing adaptive interpreter, the execution mechanisms is almost same

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as the specializing adaptive interpreter. The execution mechanism is almost same
```

> as the default build, but at free-threaded CPython build, each thread maintains
> a thread-local copy of specialized bytecode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as the default build, however in a free-threaded CPython build, each thread
maintains a thread-local copy of specialized bytecode.
```

> With this change, the free-threaded CPython build achieve better performance
> and 10-15% slower than the default build.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this change, the free-threaded CPython build achieves better performance,
and is only 10-15% slower than the default build.
```

Maybe take out the slower part altogether ;-)

This work was done by many contributors, Matt Page, Neil Schemenauer,

> Sam Gross, Thomas Wouters, Donghee Na, Kirill Podoprigora and Ken Jin.

Author: I also added the @Fidget-Spinner, because I remember his early design involvation while he worked at Quansight.

Reviewer 3: I think the main thing I did that is coming in 3.14 is the stackrefs. But we needed that for the intepreter anyways so it probably counts? Either way I can be left out if the others feel inclined to.

> Meta also provided significant engineering resources for performance benchmark and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Meta also provided significant engineering resources for performance benchmarking and
```
I presume this is intended?

> design per thread specialized bytecode mechanisms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
design of per thread specialized bytecode mechanisms.
```

(Contributed by Ken Jin in :gh:`128563`, with ideas on how to implement this
in CPython by Mark Shannon, Garrett Gu, Haoran Xu, and Josh Haberman.)

.. _whatsnew314-free-threaded-cpython:

> Free-threaded CPython
> ---------------------
> 
> Free-threaded CPython now supports :pep:`659` which is known
> as the specializing adaptive interpreter. The execution mechanism is almost same
> as the default build, however in a free-threaded CPython build, each thread
> maintains a thread-local copy of specialized bytecode.
> 
> With this change, the free-threaded CPython build achieves better performance,
> and is only 10-15% slower than the default build.
> 
> This work was done by many contributors, Matt Page, Neil Schemenauer,
> Sam Gross, Thomas Wouters, Donghee Na, Kirill Podoprigora and Ken Jin.
> Meta also provided significant engineering resources for performance benchmarking and
> design of per thread specialized bytecode mechanisms.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Free-threaded mode
---------------------

The free-threaded mode (:pep:`703`), initially added in 3.13, has been significantly improved. The implementation described in PEP 703 was finished, including C API changes, and temporary workarounds in the interpreter were replaced with more permanent solutions. The specializing adaptive interpreter (:pep:`659`) is now enabled in free-threaded mode, which along with many other optimizations greatly improves its performance. The performance penalty on single-threaded code in free-threaded mode is now roughly 5-10%, depending on platform and C compiler used.

This work was done by many contributors: Sam Gross, Matt Page, Neil Schemenauer, Thomas Wouters, Donghee Na, Kirill Podoprigora, Ken Jin, Itamar Oren, Brett Simmers, Dino Viehland, Nathan Goldbaum, Ralf Gommers,
Lysandros Nikolaou, and many others.

Some of these contributors are employed by Meta, which has continued to provide significant engineering resources to support this project.

```

I went back and read the What's New entry for PEP 703 in 3.13, where we call it "free-threaded mode", so I've made the new text consistent with that. I'm trying to think if there's anything more we should call out about free-threaded changes...

I've also copied some names from last year who I know have continued to contribute (I left off @carljm, who _I think_ has been too busy with other things since last year -- but if I'm wrong, Carl, feel free to add yourself :). I also think we're probably missing a few notable contributors (@kumaraditya303? @eendebakpt? @ZeroIntensity? I've honestly lost track!) so maybe we should only list Sam's name? I'm never fussed about attribution for myself, so I'm not the right person to make that call, but I do want to recognise everyone's work.

Reviewer 4: I personally don't have much of a preference. It would of course be nice to be credited, but the bulk of my FT work has been in stdlib extensions and documentation, not necessarily the core interpreter, which the text focuses on. It would make total sense to me to reserve acknowledgments for the people who worked on that.

Reviewer 5: Same for me. The line has to be drawn somewhere, and I am fine on either side.

(Contributed by Ken Jin in :gh:`128563`, with ideas on how to implement this
in CPython by Mark Shannon, Garrett Gu, Haoran Xu, and Josh Haberman.)

.. _whatsnew314-free-threaded-cpython:

> Free-threaded mode
> ---------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Free-threaded mode
------------------
```

> The free-threaded mode (:pep:`703`), initially added in 3.13, has been significantly improved. The implementation described in PEP 703 was finished, including C API changes, and temporary workarounds in the interpreter were replaced with more permanent solutions. The specializing adaptive interpreter (:pep:`659`) is now enabled in free-threaded mode, which along with many other optimizations greatly improves its performance. The performance penalty on single-threaded code in free-threaded mode is now roughly 5-10%, depending on platform and C compiler used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Free-threaded mode (:pep:`703`), initially added in 3.13, has been significantly improved. The implementation described in PEP 703 was finished, including C API changes, and temporary workarounds in the interpreter were replaced with more permanent solutions. The specializing adaptive interpreter (:pep:`659`) is now enabled in free-threaded mode, which along with many other optimizations greatly improves its performance. The performance penalty on single-threaded code in free-threaded mode is now roughly 5-10%, depending on platform and C compiler used.
```

Reviewer 2: Grammar fix, no need for preposition.

> This work was done by many contributors: Sam Gross, Matt Page, Neil Schemenauer, Thomas Wouters, Donghee Na, Kirill Podoprigora, Ken Jin, Itamar Oren, Brett Simmers, Dino Viehland, Nathan Goldbaum, Ralf Gommers,
> Lysandros Nikolaou, and many others.

Reviewer 6: I think we should include Kumar Aditya in the list of contributors as well.

```suggestion
This work was done by many contributors: Sam Gross, Matt Page, Neil Schemenauer, Thomas Wouters, Donghee Na, Kirill Podoprigora, Ken Jin, Itamar Oren, Brett Simmers, Dino Viehland, Nathan Goldbaum, Ralf Gommers,
Lysandros Nikolaou, Kumar Aditya, and many others.
```

Reviewer 3: We're forgetting Edgar Margffoy as well.

> Lysandros Nikolaou, Kumar Aditya, and many others.

Reviewer 3: Can you add Edgar Margffoy as well please? We forgot him in the 3.13 notes I think

Author: Done!

> Free-threaded mode (:pep:`703`), initially added in 3.13, has been significantly improved. The implementation described in PEP 703 was finished, including C API changes, and temporary workarounds in the interpreter were replaced with more permanent solutions. The specializing adaptive interpreter (:pep:`659`) is now enabled in free-threaded mode, which along with many other optimizations greatly improves its performance. The performance penalty on single-threaded code in free-threaded mode is now roughly 5-10%, depending on platform and C compiler used.
> 
> This work was done by many contributors: Sam Gross, Matt Page, Neil Schemenauer, Thomas Wouters, Donghee Na, Kirill Podoprigora, Ken Jin, Itamar Oren, Brett Simmers, Dino Viehland, Nathan Goldbaum, Ralf Gommers,
> Lysandros Nikolaou, and many others.
> 
> Some of these contributors are employed by Meta, which has continued to provide significant engineering resources to support this project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Free-threaded mode (:pep:`703`), initially added in 3.13, has been significantly 
improved. The implementation described in PEP 703 was finished, including C API
changes, and temporary workarounds in the interpreter were replaced with more
permanent solutions. The specializing adaptive interpreter (:pep:`659`) is now
enabled in free-threaded mode, which along with many other optimizations
greatly improves its performance. The performance penalty on single-threaded
code in free-threaded mode is now roughly 5-10%, depending on platform and C
compiler used.

This work was done by many contributors: Sam Gross, Matt Page, Neil Schemenauer,
Thomas Wouters, Donghee Na, Kirill Podoprigora, Ken Jin, Itamar Oren, Brett Simmers,
Dino Viehland, Nathan Goldbaum, Ralf Gommers, Lysandros Nikolaou, and many others.

Some of these contributors are employed by Meta, which has continued to provide
significant engineering resources to support this project.
```
Wrapped it for you:-)
